=========================================================
Rule: select Modifiers Must Be on the Same Line as select
=========================================================

**Rule Code:** ``LT10``

**Name:** ``select_modifiers_check``

Overview
--------

In SQL queries, modifiers such as `DISTINCT`, `ALL`, or `TOP` should be placed on the same line as the `select` keyword. This best practice improves the readability and consistency of the query, ensuring that the modifier's relationship to the `select` statement is clear. Placing modifiers on a separate line can make the query harder to read and may lead to confusion.

Explanation
-----------

Anti-pattern: select Modifiers on a Separate Line
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When modifiers like `DISTINCT` are placed on a separate line from the `select` keyword, it can break the flow of the query and make it harder to understand. This layout may cause unnecessary confusion for developers when reading or modifying the query.

**Example of select Modifiers on a Separate Line (Anti-pattern):**

.. code-block:: sql

    select distinct
           foo.id,
           foo.name
      from foo;

In this example, `DISTINCT` is placed on a separate line, which breaks the connection between the `select` keyword and its modifier, making the query less readable.

Best Practice: select Modifiers on the Same Line
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For clarity and readability, any modifiers such as `DISTINCT` should be placed on the same line as the `select` keyword. This keeps the query concise and ensures that the intent of the modifier is immediately clear to anyone reading the code.

**Refactored Example with select Modifiers on the Same Line (Best Practice):**

.. code-block:: sql

    select distinct
           foo.id,
           foo.name
      from foo;

In this refactored example, the `DISTINCT` modifier is placed directly after the `select` keyword on the same line, making the query clearer and more readable.

Conclusion
----------

Keeping `select` modifiers on the same line as the `select` keyword ensures that SQL queries are more readable and consistent. Following this rule helps developers understand the structure and intent of the query more easily, leading to better maintainability.

Groups:
-------

- `all <../..>`_
- `layout <../..#layout-rules>`_